# 12. OAuth for the Internet of Things

## Limitations of IoT and Smarthome devices

- **OAuth on Devices Without Browsers/Keyboards**:

  - The OAuth flow on devices without traditional input methods like keyboards or browsers (e.g., IoT devices, smart TVs) is challenging.
  - Traditional OAuth flow requires a browser for user authentication and a keyboard for entering credentials, which doesn't work for these devices.

- **Challenges with Authentication on Such Devices**:

  - Entering passwords on devices like smart TVs is cumbersome, as it requires slow, manual input.
  - Voice assistants and other devices without keyboards make it impractical to enter passwords verbally.

- **Introduction to Device Flow**:

  - **Device Flow** solves this issue by separating the authentication process. It involves using two devices: one to display a URL and code (e.g., on a TV), and the other (phone or computer) to enter the code and log in.
  - The device and the user’s login device don’t need to communicate directly, as coordination is handled via the OAuth server.

- **How Device Flow Works**:

  - The device starts the OAuth flow and gets a set of instructions and a code.
  - The user enters the code on another device (phone/computer) via a URL and logs in.
  - The device waits for confirmation from the OAuth server (polling every few seconds) to retrieve the access token once the login is completed.

- **Differences from Other OAuth Flows**:

  - Device Flow was specifically developed for devices like smart TVs and is an extension of OAuth.
  - Not all OAuth servers support Device Flow, so it’s important to verify server compatibility.

- **Proxy Server for Device Flow**:

  - If the OAuth server doesn’t support Device Flow, a proxy server can be set up to coordinate the flow.
  - A [GitHub project](https://github.com/aaronpk/Device-Flow-Proxy-Server) exists for creating a proxy server to enable Device Flow with any OAuth server.

## OAuth Device flow for browserless devices

1. User logs in
1. Device makes a request to the Authorization server's `/device` endpoint to start the OAuth flow and get the device code

   ```curl
   POST https://authserver.com/device

   client_id=<CLIENT_ID>
   scope=youtube
   ```

   server's response:

   ```curl
   {
     "device_code": "<random string>",
     "user_code": "<random string>",
     "verification_uri": "https://example.com/device",
     "expires_in":1800,
     "interval":5
   }
   ```

   - `device_code`: long random string that the device is going to use to poll the authorization server to detect whether the user has logged in
   - `user_code`: code user is going to enter by visiting the `verification_uri` to login to the authorization server
   - `expires_in`: this response data expiry time
   - `interval`: number of seconds between each poll request from device to the authorization server

1. Device shows the `verification_uri` and the `user_code` to the user, asking them to visit the link and enter the code.

1. User visits the link on another device (cell phone), enters the code, and is redirected to the authroization server's login page.

   (In the meantime, the device will keep polling the authorization server's token endpoint to know if the user has logged in)

   ```curl
   POST https://authserver.com/token

   grant_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant_type:device_code
   client_id=<CLIENT_ID>
   device_code=<DEVICE_CODE>
   ```

1. User logs in and approves the request via consent screen

1. Once the user has logged in successfully, the next poll request to the authorization server's token endpoint will receive the access token from the server

   ```
   {
     "access_token": <ACCESS_TOKEN>,
     "expires_in": 3600,
     "refresh_token": <REFRESH_TOKEN>
   }
   ```

   Once the access token expires, the device is able to use the refresh token to get the new access token to avoid making the user go through the complete flow again.

<hr>

- [Previous -> 11. OAuth for Single Page apps](11.%20OAuth%20for%20Single%20Page%20apps.md)
- [Next -> 13. Client Credentials Flow](13.%20Client%20Credentials%20Flow.md)
